## Coursera's Mastering Software Development in R - Capstone Project

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/danielmoralesx/noaaser.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/danielmoralesx/noaaser)

This package's release is the capstone project for Coursera's Mastering 
Software Development in R Specialization. The functions are for treatment and 
analysis of data from U.S. National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration
(NOAA) on significant earthquakes.

You can download the data and find some information about it at its page,
[here](https://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/nndc/struts/form?t=101650&s=1&d=1). You can 
find an older version of the dataset in inst/extdata, from 2018-11-10. If you
want direct links, the dataset is
[here](https://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/nndc/struts/results?type_0=Exact&query_0=$ID&t=101650&s=13&d=189&dfn=signif.txt)
and variable definitions are
[here](https://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/nndc/struts/results?&t=101650&s=225&d=225).

Further information about the package can be found in the instructions for the
assessment, and you will find them below.

### Instructions

This capstone project will be centered around a dataset obtained from the U.S. 
National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) on significant 
earthquakes around the world. This dataset contains information about 5,933 
earthquakes over an approximately 4,000 year time span.

The overall goal of the capstone project is to integrate the skills you have 
developed over the courses in this Specialization and to build a software 
package that can be used to work with the NOAA Significant Earthquakes dataset. 
This dataset has a substantial amount of information embedded in it that may not
be immediately accessible to people without knowledge of the intimate details of
the dataset or of R. Your job is to provide the tools for processing and 
visualizing the data so that others may extract some use out of the information 
embedded within.

The ultimate goal of the capstone is to build an R package that will contain 
features and will satisfy a number of requirements that will be laid out in the 
subsequent sessions. You may want to begin organizing your package and insert 
various features as you go through the capstone project.

### Obtain and Clean the Data

This session is fairly straightforward and involves obtaining/downloading the 
dataset and writing functions to clean up some of the variables. The dataset is 
in tab-delimited format and can be read in using the read_delim() function in 
the readr package.

After downloading and reading in the dataset, the overall task for this session 
is to write a function named eq_clean_data()that takes raw NOAA data frame and 
returns a clean data frame. The clean data frame should have the following:

1. A date column created by uniting the year, month, day and converting it to 
the Date class
2. LATITUDE and LONGITUDE columns converted to numeric class
3. In addition, write a function eq_location_clean() that cleans the 
LOCATION_NAME column by stripping out the country name (including the colon) and
converts names to title case (as opposed to all caps). This will be needed later
for annotating visualizations. This function should be applied to the raw data 
to produce a cleaned up version of the LOCATION_NAME column.

Functions for this session are stored in eq_cleaning.R.

### Visualization Tools

The goal of this session is to build two geoms that can be used in conjunction 
with the ggplot2 package to visualize some of the information in the NOAA 
earthquakes dataset. In particular, we would like to visualize the times at
which earthquakes occur within certain countries. In addition to showing the 
dates on which the earthquakes occur, we can also show the magnitudes (i.e. 
Richter scale value) and the number of deaths associated with each earthquake.

1. Build a geom for ggplot2 called geom_timeline() for plotting a time line of 
earthquakes ranging from xmin to xmaxdates with a point for each earthquake. 
Optional aesthetics include color, size, and alpha (for transparency). The 
x aesthetic is a date and an optional y aesthetic is a factor indicating some 
stratification in which case multiple time lines will be plotted for each level 
of the factor (e.g. country).

```r
noaase_raw <- readr::read_delim("inst/extdata/earthquakes.tsv.gz", "\t")
noaase_raw %>%
  eq_clean_data() %>%
  filter(YEAR >= 2000, YEAR <= 2016, COUNTRY == "USA") %>%
  ggplot(ggplot2::aes(x = DATE,
                      size = as.numeric(EQ_PRIMARY),
                      color = as.numeric(TOTAL_DEATHS))) +
  geom_timeline() +
  theme_classic() +
  labs(size = "Richter scale value", color = "# deaths") +
  theme(axis.line.y = ggplot2::element_blank(),
        axis.ticks.y = ggplot2::element_blank(),
        axis.title.y = ggplot2::element_blank(),
        legend.position = "bottom") +
  ggplot2::guides(size = ggplot2::guide_legend(order = 1))
```

![](man/figures/readme_tl1.png)

2. Build a geom called geom_timeline_label() for adding annotations to the 
earthquake data. This geom adds a vertical line to each data point with a text 
annotation (e.g. the location of the earthquake) attached to each line. There 
should be an option to subset to n_max number of earthquakes, where we take the 
n_max largest (by magnitude) earthquakes. Aesthetics are x, which is the date of
the earthquake and label which takes the column name from which annotations will
be obtained.

```r
noaase_raw <- readr::read_delim("inst/extdata/earthquakes.tsv.gz", "\t")
noaase_raw %>%
  eq_clean_data() %>%
  eq_location_clean() %>%
  filter(YEAR >= 2000, YEAR <= 2016, COUNTRY == "USA") %>%
  ggplot(ggplot2::aes(x = DATE,
                      size = as.numeric(EQ_PRIMARY),
                      color = as.numeric(TOTAL_DEATHS),
                      label = LOCATION_NAME)) +
  geom_timeline() +
  geom_timeline_label(n_max = 5) +
  theme_classic() +
  labs(size = "Richter scale value", color = "# deaths") +
  theme(axis.line.y = ggplot2::element_blank(),
        axis.ticks.y = ggplot2::element_blank(),
        axis.title.y = ggplot2::element_blank(),
        legend.position = "bottom") +
  ggplot2::guides(size = ggplot2::guide_legend(order = 1))
```

![](man/figures/readme_tl2.png)

```r
noaase_raw <- readr::read_delim("inst/extdata/earthquakes.tsv.gz", "\t")
noaase_raw %>%
  eq_clean_data() %>%
  eq_location_clean() %>%
  filter(YEAR >= 2000, YEAR <= 2016, COUNTRY %in% c("USA", "CHINA")) %>%
  ggplot(ggplot2::aes(x = DATE,
                      y = COUNTRY,
                      size = as.numeric(EQ_PRIMARY),
                      color = as.numeric(TOTAL_DEATHS),
                      label = LOCATION_NAME)) +
  geom_timeline() +
  geom_timeline_label(n_max = 5) +
  theme_classic() +
  labs(size = "Richter scale value", color = "# deaths") +
  theme(axis.line.y = ggplot2::element_blank(),
        axis.ticks.y = ggplot2::element_blank(),
        axis.title.y = ggplot2::element_blank(),
        legend.position = "bottom") +
  ggplot2::guides(size = ggplot2::guide_legend(order = 1))
```

![](man/figures/readme_tl3.png)

Functions for this session are stored in eq_geoms.R.

### Mapping Tools

In addition to building tools to visualize the earthquakes in time (as we did in
the last session), itâ€™s important that we can visualize them in space too. In 
this session we will build some tools for mapping the earthquake epicenters and 
providing some annotations with the mapped data.

Build a function called eq_map() that takes an argument data containing the 
filtered data frame with earthquakes to visualize. The function maps the 
epicenters (LATITUDE/LONGITUDE) and annotates each point with in pop up window 
containing annotation data stored in a column of the data frame. The user should
be able to choose which column is used for the annotation in the pop-up with a 
function argument named annot_col. Each earthquake should be shown with a 
circle, and the radius of the circle should be proportional to the earthquake's 
magnitude (EQ_PRIMARY). Your code, assuming you have the earthquake data saved 
in your working directory as "earthquakes.tsv.gz", should be able to be used in 
the following way:

```r
noaase_raw <- readr::read_delim("inst/extdata/earthquakes.tsv.gz", "\t")
noaase_raw %>% 
  eq_clean_data() %>% 
  dplyr::filter(COUNTRY == "MEXICO" & lubridate::year(DATE) >= 2000) %>% 
  eq_map(annot_col = "DATE")
```

![](man/figures/readme_map1.png)

Finally, it would be useful to have more interesting pop-ups for the interactive
map created with the eq_map() function. Create a function called 
eq_create_label() that takes the dataset as an argument and creates an HTML 
label that can be used as the annotation text in the leaflet map. This function 
should put together a character string for each earthquake that will show the 
cleaned location (as cleaned by the eq_location_clean() function), the magnitude
(EQ_PRIMARY), and the total number of deaths (TOTAL_DEATHS), with boldface 
labels for each ("Location", "Total deaths", and "Magnitude"). If an earthquake 
is missing values for any of these, both the label and the value should be 
skipped for that element of the tag. Your code should be able to be used in the 
following way:

```r
noaase_raw <- readr::read_delim("inst/extdata/earthquakes.tsv.gz", "\t")
noaase_raw %>% 
  eq_clean_data() %>% 
  dplyr::filter(COUNTRY == "MEXICO" & lubridate::year(DATE) >= 2000) %>% 
  dplyr::mutate(popup_text = eq_create_label(.)) %>% 
  eq_map(annot_col = "popup_text")
```

![](man/figures/readme_map2.png)

Functions for this session are stored in eq_maps.R.

### Documentation and Packaging

Documentation is one of the most important and most commonly overlooked steps 
when writing software. You might be creating a revolutionary R package with code
that is brilliantly implemented, but without clear and accessible documentation 
nobody will be able to use your package! In R packages there are two primary 
levels of documentation, the help files for individual functions and a vignette 
which contains a detailed explanation of how the package should be used, 
including examples featuring each function in the package. You should also 
consider writing a useful README.md file for your package so that when new users
visit your package's GitHub repository they can quickly get the gist of how your
package works.

In this session you should make sure to do the following:

* Make sure that every function in your package has appropriate help page 
documentation, including an example use for every function.
* Make sure your package has a DESCRIPTION, LICENSE, NAMESPACE, and README.md 
file.
* Write a vignette for your package that includes an explanation of the purpose 
for your package and how it could be used. The vignette should include examples 
for every function that is exported in the package's NAMESPACE file.

### Testing

Whenever developing software it's always important to write good tests for your 
functions. Tests ensure that your functions are behaving the way you expect them
to behave. If you change your package in the future the tests that you've 
written will help you make sure that your changes didn't break any functionality.

In this session you should:

* Use the testthat package to write at least one test for every function in your
package.
* Use the devtools package to test your package on your computer.

### Deployment: Github and Travis

GitHub is the world's most popular code repository and it also functions as a 
great way to distribute your R package. Package users can easily install your 
package and look at's documentation if your package is on GitHub. With your 
package on GitHub you can take advantage of Travis for continuous integration. 
Each time you push new commits to GitHub, Travis will automatically rerun your 
tests!

In this session you should do the following:

* Create a GitHub repository for your package and push your package code to 
GitHub.
* Configure Travis CI so that it tests your R package. You'll need to add a 
.travis.yml file to your package.
* Once you have Travis set up add your package repository's Travis badge to your
package's README.md file.
* Make sure your package is building on Travis without any errors, warnings, or
notes.
